script to get rare variants for gene-donor outlier pair (#122)
populationgenomics/tob-wgs: scripts/rv_expression_association/README.md

## Analysis plan

The overall goal of these scripts is to run a gene-set association test to test for an association between i) a number of rare genetic variants located in and around a gene and ii) the expression level of the gene itself (in a given cell type).

At first, I am testing specifically one chromosome 22 gene (_VPREB3_), in naive B cells.
I consider variants located at most 50kb up or down-stream of the gene body (including those within the gene itself).
Later, I'll want to run this for many genes.

### Overview
This folder contains three scripts:
* [get_vep_variants.py](get_vep_variants.py) is a Python script which takes a MT + HT object, filters relevant variants (detail below) and exports to plink files
* [prepare_inputs.py](prepare_inputs.py) is a Python script which takes in genotype and expression files and prepares the input files to run SKAT
* [run_SKAT.R](run_SKAT.R) is an R script that runs SKAT using the inputs generated from the previous scripts and returns association p-values

### Step 1 - select genetic variants

> At the moment, I have subsetted both the MT object and the [VEP](https://asia.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html)-annotated object manually, using [this script](https://github.com/populationgenomics/analysis-runner/blob/main/scripts/subset_matrix_table.py) to a specific genomic region around this one specific gene (_VPREB3_), _e.g._, for the VEP-annotated hail table (from local version of populationgenomics/analysis-runner/scripts/):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment, I have subset both the MT object and the [VEP](https://asia.ensembl.org/info/docs/tools/vep/index.html)-annotated object manually, using [this script](https://github.com/populationgenomics/analysis-runner/blob/main/scripts/subset_matrix_table.py) to a specific genomic region around this one specific gene (_VPREB3_), _e.g._, for the VEP-annotated hail table (from local version of populationgenomics/analysis-runner/scripts/):
```

Then, it creates [PLINK](https://zzz.bwh.harvard.edu/plink/) files (.bed, .bim, .fam) for those variants only.
To run this, use:
```
analysis-runner --dataset "tob-wgs" \
    --description "get set of variants for a gene, convert to plink" \
    --access-level "test" \
    --output-dir "v0" \
    get_vep_variants.py
```

### Step 2 - prepare input files for SKAT

[SKAT](https://github.com/leelabsg/SKAT) is an R package to run gene-set association tests.
It requires as inputs:
* a genotype matrix (Z), samples X genetic variants
* a phenotype vector (y.c), samples X 1 (in my case, this will be the expression level of a gene across samples, see below)
* (optionally,) a kinship matrix (K), samples X samples
* (optionally,) a covariance matrix (X), samples X covariates

I use this (Python) script to prepare these input files, using similar steps as in the [CellRegMap pipeline](https://github.com/populationgenomics/cellregmap-pipeline).
To run:
```
analysis-runner --dataset "tob-wgs" \
    --description "prepare SKAT input files" \
    --access-level "test" \
    --output-dir "v0" \
    prepare_inputs.py
```

#### current steps

> for now, considering all regulatory variants (or, _e.g.,_ selecting promoter variants only) and considering pseudo-bulk (mean) expression for each individual, borrowing the expression file (here, donor-level aggregated expression in naive B cells) from Kat's eQTL files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

For now, considering all regulatory variants (or, _e.g.,_ selecting promoter variants only) and considering pseudo-bulk (mean) expression for each individual, borrowing the expression file (here, donor-level aggregated expression in naive B cells) from Kat's eQTL files.
```

## Analysis plan

> The overall goal of these scripts is to run a gene-set association test to test for an association between i) a number of rare genetic variants located in and around a gene and ii) the expression level of the gene itself (in a given cell type).

Reviewer 2: This runs a gene-set association analysis to test for an association between i) the number of rare genetic variants located in and 50kb up or down-stream of the gene and ii) the expression level of the gene itself (in a given cell type).

> The overall goal of these scripts is to run a gene-set association test to test for an association between i) a number of rare genetic variants located in and around a gene and ii) the expression level of the gene itself (in a given cell type).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This runs a gene-set association analysis to test for an association between i) the number of rare genetic variants located in and 50kb up or down-stream of the gene and ii) the expression level of the gene itself (in a given cell type).
```

> At first, I am testing specifically one chromosome 22 gene (_VPREB3_), in naive B cells.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Testing is done on one gene within chromosome 22, VPREB3, in naive B cells, which will be further expanded to multiple genes.
```

Reviewer 2: Out of curiosity, is this gene randomly-chosen?

Author: A mix! I had selected chromosome 22 somewhat at random (I was under the impression that this was the shortest chromosome, turns out that is actually chrom 21), but then since I was looking at expression in naive B cells I selected genes that were differentially expressed between naive B cells and all other cell types, hoping it would be an indication of a gene that is relevant for that specific cell type. That said at this stage this is largely just to start somewhere to build a working pipeline :)

I consider variants located at most 50kb up or down-stream of the gene body (including those within the gene itself).
Later, I'll want to run this for many genes.

### Overview
This folder contains three scripts:

> * [get_vep_variants.py](get_vep_variants.py) is a Python script which takes a MT + HT object, filters relevant variants (detail below) and exports to plink files

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [get_vep_variants.py](get_vep_variants.py) is a Python script which takes a hail MT + HT object, filters for relevant variants (detailed below), and exports to plink files
```
